---
layout: post
title: "Getting Started with CoffeeScript"
date: 2013-06-03 20:29
comments: true
author: Jeremy Morgan
categories:
- Programming
description: I take you on a little tour of CoffeeScript and show you a little about it and how it can make you a better developer.
permalink: /blog/programming/getting-started-with-coffeescript/
ogimage: https://www.jeremymorgan.com/images/el-camino-og.jpg

---
CoffeeScript has been around a while, and has always been one of those things I glanced at and read about but never really dug into. So I decided, heck why not play around with it and see what it's all about?

###What is CoffeeScript?

In a nutshell, CoffeeScript is a JavaScript generator, so in a way CoffeeScript is JavaScript. It's essentially shorthand you write to build JavaScript without spending so much time writing out all the code. 

###Why Would I Use it? 

The biggest advantage I can see is less code, and faster development. There is a lot of shorthand here, and it basically writes code you already know how to build but it takes you far less time. I'll show you a quick example:

Write the following string in CoffeeScript:

<pre>
while building = onfire then addwater()
</pre>

Pretty easy to understand, right? When compiled, it will generate the following JavaScript for you:

<pre>
// Generated by CoffeeScript 1.6.3
(function() {
  var building;

  while (building = onfire) {
    addwater();
  }

}).call(this);
</pre>

This is what is meant by Shorthand, CoffeeScript knows what you meant when you typed out the string above, and created the appropriate JavaScript. 

###How do I get it? 

To get started, you'll need to install CoffeeScript. 

####Windows
Visit the <a href="http://nodejs.org/">Node.js</a> page and click "install". Install the node.js package and when it's finished, type in 
<pre>
npm install -g coffee-script
</pre>

After installation, type "coffee -v" to verify the installation.

####Mac OSX
If you have <a href="http://mxcl.github.io/homebrew/">Homebrew</a> installed (which you should) it's really easy:

<pre>
brew update 
brew install node
npm install -g coffee-script
</pre>

And add the following to your .bashrc:

<pre>
export NODE_PATH="/usr/local/lib/node"
export PATH="/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/share/npm/bin:$PATH"
</pre>

After that run "coffee -v" at the terminal to verify your version. 

####Linux

For Debian based versions, type in 

<pre>
sudo apt-get install node
</pre>

Or you can download the Linux binaries or source from <a href="http://nodejs.org/download/">here</a> for other distributions. 

Then install the Node Package Manager:

<pre>
curl http://npmjs.org/install.sh | sh
</pre>

Once that installs, you type in:

<pre>
npm install -g coffee-script
</pre>

After installation, type "coffee -v" to verify the installation.

One thing I've noted after installing in all environments is it's pretty much the same. The NPM handles most of the work for you and if you already have Node and the NPM set up, it's a one line install. 


###Let's Write Some Code!


One of the things to help you learn is building something useful. So we'll build a small calculator to figure out your miles per gallon. 

First, let's create an html file:

{%codeblock lang=html %}
<html>
<title>CoffeeScript Demo</title>
<script src="form.js"></script>
<form id="mpgcalc" onsubmit="return validate(this);">
<ul style="list-style: none">
<li>
<label>Miles Traveled:</label>
<input type="text" name="miles" />
</li>
<li>
<label>Gallons Used:</label>
<input type="text" name="gallons" />
</li>
<li>
<label>Miles Per Gallon:</label>
<input type="text" name="mpg" />
</li>
<li>
<input type="submit"></li>
</ul>
{% endcodeblock %}


